[Music]
Bloomberg Audio Studios podcasts, radio,
news.
[Music]
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the Odd Thoughts podcast. I'm Tracy
Aloway
>> and I'm Joe Weisenthal.
>> Joe, you know what's been missing in my
life?
>> Go on. Chickens. Oh yes, actually
chickens still missing in my life, but
also a comprehensive series of
historical firewood prices in the US for
the past 300 years.
>> You know what I we have data on
literally every other commodity in the
world, but I don't have a 300year time
series on firewood prices. And I always
feel like if I just had that number,
then I would have the complete picture
of commodities. Well, I know we're sort
of joking, but this is actually
important because if you think about the
US in the 1700s or the 1800s, people
used firewood. The vast majority of
America's energy consumption came from
wood.
>> Wait, do you remember a couple months
ago when I was that guy who brought up
wages of destruction in every chat?
>> Are you going to do it again?
>> No.
>> Oh, well, you just did.
>> No. Now I'm going to be the guy who
brings up Moby Dick in every
conversation because I've been reading
Moby Dick and so I'm really interested
in energy transitions in the 1800s
because one of the things that uh you
know has come up in some of our past
conversations such as with Bob Brackett
etc. Whale oil is basically the only
energy source that we've completely
eliminated. Every other historical
energy source that we've had we still
using it to some degree. They never
totally disappear. And so I'm very
interested in the phenomenon of like
past historical energy transitions.
People talk about the transition now,
but it's interesting to sort of examine
other periods when one form of fossil
fuel or other fuel like went out of
style, so to speak, or became
uneconomical.
>> Well, I have to say as the uh proud
owner of a wood burning stove now and
formerly a coal burning stove,
>> you're interested in energy transition,
too.
>> Absolutely. So I am very pleased to say
that we have the perfect guest. We are
going to be speaking with the author of
a paper that's called firewood in the
American economy 1700 to 2010 and it is
all about collecting historical data on
firewood prices and then figuring out
how that fits into the wider economy and
measures of other things like output and
productivity and things like that. So we
have Nicholas Mueller. is the Lester and
Judith Leave Professor of Economics,
Engineering, and Public Policy over at
Carnegie Melon. So, Nick, welcome to the
show.
>> Thank you so much. It's a pleasure to be
here.
>> Why don't I start out with why firewood?
Um, and I know I mentioned that firewood
was the majority of US energy
consumption for many, many years. Is it
right to think of it sort of as like oil
the 1800's equivalent of oil powering
the entire economy?
>> Yeah. So there are two reasons why I
focused on this particular topic in a
paper. one, as you said, somewhere
around or before the Civil War back
before the American Revolution or the
founding of the country, essentially all
the energy in the US economy, whether it
was in households or firms doing
primitive things, it was all coming from
firewood. And so the fact that the
academic literature and government
statistics didn't really have a
reasonably comprehensive time series of
these prices seemed like a really big
gap to me. And so that was one reason to
just set out filling that knowledge gap.
The other was prior to being at Carnegie
Melon, I taught at Mbury College in
Vermont. And my wife and kids and I used
to get heat from firewood in a wood
stove. And so you participate in these
informal markets for firewood even
today. And it got me thinking about what
that must have been like long ago. And
sure enough, it turned out to be a
pretty interesting process to gather
these prices.
>> I never thought of going to Lowe's to
buy a bundle of firewood as
participating in an informal market. I
guess it is formalized nowadays, but
certainly if you're a professor, that's
probably how you're thinking about it. I
used to live in Vermont and I I
remember, you know, it was not that
uncommon for people to buy a cord of
firewood or however much they
anticipated needing for the winter to
heat their homes, etc. So, I get the
idea that like, okay, fire was this
dominant source of energy for a long
time in the American economy? What are
we gained by actually having the
numbers? Like, okay, we know it. We know
the fact about firewood's existence and
prominence. What does it help us now and
we'll get into the details but what does
it help us now to actually have some
sense of the size and scale?
>> Yeah. So I think two primary reasons.
One when we look at existing prior to
this paper existing estimates of the
early American economy and gross
domestic product. It had very very
sparse information on firewood prices
and they turn out to be really low
compared to the the prices I gathered.
And so what that means is even with the
same estimates of how much wood was
consumed, those existing estimates of
GDP that included that measure were
really low in that regard. So the energy
cost of economic growth using existing
estimates looked much much lower than
what these updated numbers suggest. So
size of the economy two growth in the
economy over time especially during the
early to mid 1800s appears to be
different when you use the updated
series. And then three when you consider
that the bulk of firewood was produced
in the agricultural sector often in an
informal way meaning just home
production. But even when you think
about the wood that was hauled into some
of our newly forming cities, that was
really all coming from agriculture. And
that means that when we think about
existing measures of agricultural
productivity that included the sort of
things you would expect, livestock and
crops and the like, it was really
missing this important energy commodity
which was actually being attributed or
should be attributed to that sector. And
so agricultural productivity during this
period would have been mismeasured as
well.
>> So you mentioned the data gap and how
significant this would be for you know
measuring something like the growth of
the US economy in those years. I have to
imagine one of the difficulties in
gathering the data for something like
this is because firewood is or was still
is an informal market as you pointed
out. And I know I joked earlier that
firewood was like the oil equivalent of
the 19th century, but of course the big
difference is not everyone has an oil
gusher in their backyard or refinery.
people in the 1800s could just go out
into their land and chop down firewood.
So in some respect they weren't even
paying any prices for it. So I guess my
question is why didn't the data exist
before? And then how did you actually go
about gathering it?
>> Sure. So the critical process that
enabled the prices and the price data
and the the records of advertisements
and exchange to start showing up in a
systematic way was urbanization.
>> What ended up happening which you know
this is well known in in US economic
history somewhere between the American
Revolution and the Civil War the
population started to urbanize. We were
still pretty agrarian around the time of
the Civil War, but people were moving to
cities. And once you move to cities, you
lose that idea, Tracy, that you you just
mentioned, which is we all have a wood
lot in our backyard. You don't if you
live in a city. And so the process of
urbanization gave birth to markets for
firewood that actually passed through
commercial exchange. the agricultural
sector was still producing the firewood,
but now it was being hauled into cities
by various means and sold in I don't
want to say organized markets in in the
sense that your breeders might think,
but in the sense that there was some
exchange, not just the use of time and
labor to procure the wood. And so that
led to records of really advertisements
in that period where we started to see
an abundance of data on wood by cord, by
species, by month, by year that we could
use software to extract from PDF images.
Hm. So what is the let's talk about the
data itself because we've been talking
about the why of the data and the how of
the data but what are the uh the top
lines in terms of what your research
showed.
>> Yeah. So on the data gathering process
it's important to note that I'm sure as
I'm talking about urbanization
urbanization happening in the 1800s. You
know the price series go back to 1700. I
actually have in an appendex prices from
the 1600s. That begs the question where
those came from and they come from
largely probate and estate records where
when the head of household is deceased,
what would happen is legal entities
would come into the household and they
would value assets.
>> And much like they do today, there'd be
a settlement of an estate that includes
a house and barn and animals and all the
things in the household. And often one
of the things in the records was five
cords of firewood or you know 10 cords
of firewood or one cord and they would
value it because they had to legally in
terms of documenting the value of the
estate. So the really early stuff came
from there. Now back to Joe's question
about what do we learn about the prices
themselves and and the topline numbers.
There's really three patterns that come
out. There's lots of nuance, but there's
three patterns that come out in the
data. From 1700 to around 1,800, there's
lots of noise and volatility in the
price series, but there's no significant
trend when you correct for inflation. So
that means firewood prices were
basically changing at the same rate that
the price indices, the equivalent of a
consumer price index, were changing over
that period of time. Then from 1800 to
the Civil War, firewood prices started
to increase in real terms, implying that
they were rising more rapidly than
inflation, often between half a percent
and 1% real per year. And then after the
Civil War up to the modern era, there
really wasn't uh a lot of evidence of a
systematic price change until late in
the 20th century around the energy
crisis that we're all familiar with in
the 1970s. there was a a systematic move
back to firewood in some parts of the US
and that shows up as real price
increases. It probably had to do with
the oil price spikes at the time.
>> You have these three time periods where
there's no real change. There's rapid
price appreciation between 1800 and the
Civil War and then there's not a lot of
evidence of systematic price changes
afterwards. And it's that middle period
that I think is the most important for
how we think about the US economy and
how we think about the ensuing
transition from biomass to coal.
>> Well, I definitely want to talk about
that transition, but just before we do,
why did prices actually increase that
quickly in that time period? Because I
imagine, okay, for prices to move, you
have changes in supply and demand, but
the supply of wood probably isn't
changing that rapidly. Is it all just a
demand story?
>> Yeah, clearly the the demand side is at
work. Uh the population is growing.
We're engaging in more manufacturing
activities. Iron manufacturing from the
Civil War back in time to when it
started relied exclusively on charcoal.
So that was, you know, cut down wood,
bake the moisture and impurities out of
it and then use the resulting carbon to
produce the heat that was needed. So
things were growing, the demand side was
growing. But it's my sense, and this is
really from reading about the time. I
don't I don't have an econometric or an
empirical way to nail down a specific
cause for the price increases, but I
think what was happening based on
reading is that the supplies of wood
were getting scarce closer to cities.
>> And so what ended up happening was the
transport distances and hence costs to
get wood into the cities for both
consumers and firms was increasing.
Concurrent with that process, the
railroad network was growing. And so on
the one hand, you would imagine that
increasing rail networks would reduce
cost, right? You you just load up a
train, you get the train into the
cities, and that would be much more
cost-effective than putting it in a cart
and pulling it with a horse or putting
it in a canal. But the other thing to
remember is that locomotives until
really after the Civil War did not run
on coal. They burned wood as well.
>> And so you have this ambiguous effect of
the railroads that may have lowered
costs, but then they were voracious
consumers of of wood themselves. And so
I think it is a scarcity story. It's not
a scarcity story in the sense that the
forests were gone, but rather the
forests that had been feeding urban
demand for wood were receding and that
led to increases in transportation costs
to get uh to get the fuel into cities
and the demand centers.
[Music]
Well,
I guess the other dynamic that I'm
curious about in your story is sort of
the labor side. So, if you have a bunch
of people moving from rural areas to
cities, that's fewer people who are
theoretically in the business of cutting
down trees. And I'm curious if in your
research, you know, was there a scarcity
of labor to cut down the trees? And I'm
just curious, were there technological
or productivity gains that you found in
the business of cutting down trees
period such that in the mid 1800s did
that process look substantively
different than maybe earlier in the 18th
century?
>> The only thing I can really say about
the agricultural labor supply is
regional.
>> And there's a table in the paper that
unpacks agricultural productivity growth
in the northern areas and the southern
areas of the country. And one thing that
table shows is that I think if I have it
right, the rates of consumption of
firewood outpace the rate of growth of
agricultural workers in the north
>> and kept pace in the south. And so if
there is an instance where scarcity and
labor supply, which would have driven up
wages, was working as a force to drive
up prices, it would have been the north.
And that probably also aligns with the
urbanization dimension, right? because
the cities Philadelphia
>> uh New York and Boston were big and they
were growing rapidly and so those two
forces would align on the technology
piece I really can't say anything about
harvest or about felling but what I can
say is the technology that was used to
move wood around so whether it was going
into a city or whether it was going into
a village and and being sold we know
that that had to have matured from very
simple transportation uh means of
transportations like animals and carts.
>> Mhm.
>> To canals and to augment boats on rivers
like the Eerie Canal is is an example
where we know firewood was shipped to
ultimately railroads as I mentioned
earlier which were strategically
designed to connect population centers
which the data suggests were growing
very rapidly at this time. So there's
clear technological change. It's just
the funny thing about railroads until
about the Civil War is they were both
enhancing supply of firewood in demand
setters, but they were also consuming
really crazy amounts of wood. I mean,
there were multiple cord stashes along
rail lines that were monitored or manned
by the railroads. Hm.
>> And they had cords of wood and the
trains would pass by and stop and they'd
load up the hoppers with firewood that
had been felled from the surrounding
surrounding areas. So this this was a
really significant demand side
associated with that technological
change.
>> Okay. So the technological change was
mostly on the transportation side, not
like I don't know people adding a new
type of blade to their axe or something
like that. But this actually reminds me
of something I wanted to ask, which is
anyone who has ever lit a wood fire will
know that not all wood is created equal,
and I certainly have been on the uh the
receiving end of uh bad wet wood popping
in my face and things like that. Did you
take into account quality of wood or
different species?
>> Yeah, it's really neat. So much of the
data does not provide details on type of
wood or whether it's seasoned or dry.
However, there are some of the data
provided that do report say cord of oak,
cord of hickory, cord of pine. So they
do report differences by species.
And then the data for Portland, Oregon
has about two decades worth that
distinguishes grades of se how the
extent to which it's seasoned. So
there's green chords, there's half dry
cords, and then there's fully dry cords.
And so what do those data tell us? When
you try to assess differences,
systematic differences in price, let's
say to start by species, there's a
figure in the paper in one of the
appendices that shows there's a pretty
clear positive correlation between
prices and energy content of the species
of wood. And so that kind of makes sense
that a cord of hickory or a quart of oak
would be worth more to the consumer and
in equilibrium would have a a higher
market price than say a cord of pine or
a cord of a softer hardwood. And so that
the data support that. The second point
to make is even though the information
on seasoning of the wood or aging of the
wood is sparse, I do observe the month
at which the prices are posted for a lot
of the data. And uh using that
information, you can see there's a
pretty steep discount for wood marketed
in the summer.
And one interpretation of that is that
there's just lower demand, and that's
fine. The the other interpretation is
that there is storage and seasoning
going on where uh some portion of wood
harvested and or purchased in the summer
is then stored to be sold at higher spot
price times in the winter and that would
reflect systematic differences in
whether the wood is seasoned or green
according to the season. So there's like
a contango effect in the firewood market
in the firewood market or a seasonal
contango so to speak. I have another
technological question. You know you
mentioned at the very beginning of your
time series collecting data from probate
sales and so forth which I think
inherently are sort of like private data
that most people would not have access
to unless they tried to then newspapers
which is more important and I think this
is an interesting story of commodities.
Do you observe anything I guess what I
would say of spreads or dispersion of
prices as transparency became more of a
thing? So such that once firewood became
something that got advertised in a
newspaper. Are the range of prices that
were transacted in a given time period
narrower than they were when this was
more private archival data that you're
working from?
>> It's a fascinating question. One thing
as an academic, one thing I hope is that
having invested time and research
assistance time in putting together this
data set is that there'll be multiple
papers that come from this, right? And
the ability to ask and answer uh a whole
series of questions.
>> One of those is price dispersion.
>> Yeah.
>> Right. And so this this idea that in a
given market or maybe across markets
there are systematic differences in the
range or spread of prices for similar
commodities. So largely that's a topic
for future research. But what I will say
is when you look at the period from say
1800 just roughly 1800 to the civil war
I do see regional convergence in prices.
So southeast, northeast, midwest. I see
some evidence of regional convergence
and the working hypothesis there is that
the railroads were such an effective
means to move the wood that if there
were persistent price differences
between say the Midwest which included
Ohio and and Pittsburgh and and Michigan
and the northeastern cities then the
entrepreneur could put a bunch of wood
on a train in Ohio and ship it over to
New York, Philadelphia and Boston and
earn money and then therefore or
eventually close those spreads. And as I
said, I do see some evidence of that
occurring as the railroad networks would
have been growing up to the Civil War.
After the Civil War, people were
basically turning to coal and so, you
know, you wouldn't see much.
>> Tracy, this is just like our first
Stinson Dean conversation all over
again. It's just the same like the idea
of like, you know, the degree to which
you're outside of the trucking lane or
outside of the rail lane and these price
convergence, nothing ever changes.
>> No. Uh, apparently not. Well, actually,
we just said that, but something did
change in the mid 1800s, which is, I
guess, the arrival of cheaper coal. What
exactly was it about coal or the
development of coal that suddenly made
it a big competitor to firewood?
>> So, the data show, well, let me say to
be clear, what I did for coal was to
assemble existing price estimates. So to
be very clear with your listeners, I
didn't go and gather a bunch of original
information on on coal prices. There
were and are very good data sources
stretching back into the 19th century on
anththerite by tuminous coal. And I use
those and anecdotal information,
qualitative information learned from
reading that basically commercial coal
production really got going around and
just before the Civil War, maybe 1830,
1840 at the earliest. And I can't speak
technologically to the process of
extracting and shipping coal. It's just
not I don't there people that know a lot
more about that than I do. But as with
many production processes,
it exhibited a pattern of declining
cost, unit costs over time as production
ramped up. And you see that in the
existing coal data. It's just an
empirical regularity.
Now bear that in mind as I repeat in the
mid 1800s as the economy is growing from
1800 towards the civil war I had just
mentioned that firewood prices were
increasing right so you have these
contrasting patterns for two energy
fuels that tell us one was getting
cheaper while the other one was getting
more expensive so if I stopped there and
said you know that's the story that that
might make sense but the other thing to
mention about firewood is It's really
bulky, right? I mean, a cord is 4x4 by 8
and it it's got a good amount of energy
stored in a dry cord or embodied in a
dry cord, but the same amount of energy
comes from a lot smaller volume of coal.
And so from a consumer point of view or
from a business point of view, if you've
got to pay for storage or you have to
manage an inventory, not only is coal
getting cheaper, but it's also easier to
work with in that sense. And I think
that it was those two dimensions, so
both literally the price and the
non-quantitative attributes of the fuels
that would have contributed to the
transition.
>> The idea there's just more on any given
car load of coal, there's just way more
BTUs than there would be on that same
carload of firewood.
>> Yeah. If if you had a volume measure.
Yeah.
>> Right. So 4x4 by8 dry firewood, 4x4 by8
of coal. You're going to get more BTUs
out of coal, especially anththerite. And
anththerite was the one that was really
taking off at this time.
>> I think what's interesting to me, you
know, going back to one of your first
answers about your study is, and this
gets back to a theme that we've talked
about a lot on the show, like coal
didn't kill firewood. I mean, your
story, as you describe it, ends in the
late 20th century. So even though we may
talk about the coal era having in large
part replaced firewood from an
industrial standpoint from a price
standpoint, you know, the firewood
industry persisted in a meaningful
sense, it sounds like for at least
another century.
>> Yeah, there's a really nice database
that the census put together that by
state shows the share of home heating
fuel expenditures by major fuel. It goes
back to 1940. And if you look at 1940,
states like Oregon or the state of
Washington or some of the states in New
England have appreciable shares of home
heating that's coming from wood. So 1940
is a long time ago. I I get that. But at
the same time, it's not 1840, right?
It's not the Civil War. And those data
are evidence in a sense that yes, I
would agree with the fact that we really
transitioned from a biomass to a fossil
economy around the Civil War, but I
would also agree that it's not as if
demand for firewood was completely
extinguished at that time. Clearly,
there were pockets of continued
significant reliance on the fuel. And
then we had a massive energy price shock
in the 1970s. And what that clearly
showed was a reversion to reliance on
the fuel as a means to hedge against
home energy costs.
>> I think you mentioned the 2008 financial
crisis as well saw demand for firewood
go up and maybe prices from what I
remember. But that's such a fascinating
data point because a it illustrates just
how bad the crisis actually was that
people had to turn to firewood because
they couldn't afford to heat their
houses in other ways. But then it also
goes to the point that firewood is lindy
I guess.
>> Yeah, it's a very interesting phenomenon
to consider the link between social and
let's say geopolitical disruptions
and consumer habits that influence
things like fuel choice or carbon
emissions. The financial crisis is one.
The energy crisis is another. I have a
related working paper that demonstrates
that US carbon intensity defined as tons
per dollar GDP peaked in 1917
>> and that's the year right before World
War I ended and the Spanish flu outbreak
happened which were two both demand and
supply shocks working in the same
direction. If you go back even further,
the Civil War is really the the flipping
point here for the relationship between
household income and demand for
firewood. Um, and that's shown in one of
the figures in the paper where the
income elasticity, the percentage change
in income is associated with the
percentage change in consumption of
firewood flipped from a positive number.
>> As we got more wealthy, we used more
firewood to a negative number. As we got
more wealthy, we actually used less
firewood as we transitioned to coal. And
those all are lining up on significant
geopolitical or social periods like
recessions and wars and things of that
nature.
[Music]
Is there a Moby Dick for Firewood? Is
there a novel, you know, like I I've
read about the whailing industry and
then I you know, read a novel about it.
Is there a story that I could read that
will sort of give me a feel for the uh
you know, the early 1800s firewood
industry?
>> Is there a book that Joe is gonna read
and then talk incessantly about for the
next three months? So, have you read
COD?
>> I've heard of it. Yes. Wait, that's a
that's a non-fiction though, right?
>> It's non-fiction. And then the same
author wrote a book called Salt.
>> Okay. Yeah.
>> All about COD. All about salt. There
should be a book entitled Firewood or
Wood or something. The closest thing I I
can suggest is a is a paper by I believe
it's Arthur Cole in 1970.
>> And the title is is something like the
mystery of fuelwood pricing in the
United States. And it is largely
qualitative and it's actually asking one
of the questions that this paper tries
to answer which is we were utterly
reliant on this energy source and yet
there is no systematic evidence of how
prices behaved from the revolution to in
his case 1970 and why is that? And so
it's a great read. It's not you know too
dense an academic. It's it's more
written like something that would be uh
a pleasure to read than just purely an
academic piece.
>> I'll have to uh check it out. So, I'm
curious, you know, obviously the quote
energy transition unquote is something
that we think about now and talk about a
lot now. Um you know, and the trajectory
of oil demand, the trajectory of natural
gas demand and so forth. all of which
are highly uncertain. Other than filling
in the historical record for this
important thing and sort of reorienting
our understanding about agricultural
productivity and GDP etc. would you say
there are any takeaways from your
research that sort of speak more
directly or speak directly to some of
the energy debates that we're having
right now?
>> Yeah. So I think there are three ways in
which there's a plausible connection
between the conclusions in this paper
and I don't want to say just the US but
globally some of the issues related to
energy in the environment.
>> The first I I kind of mentioned already
which is often energy transitions are
associated with some seemingly exogenous
source of social upheaval. So in 2008
US carbon emissions in levels peaked.
Now, it's just really interesting that
that again happened in a year after
which the US economy really did not do
well for for a number of years. And I'm
just talking about carbon emissions. I'm
not talking about GDP or anything of the
sort. When we go back to 1860, we see
this same pattern happening with what
primary fuel consumers and firms are
turning to in order to produce and use
energy. So financial crisis, recession,
>> massive dislocation in the economy
associated with the civil war and its
its associated effects. So there's that
energy transition happening in periods
of upheaval. Two is just the notion of
resource scarcity.
We're talking in this paper about
renewable resources. We're talking in
this century at this time about
non-renewable resources and the
continued reliance on coal, oil, and
gas. What that means for sustainability
and how we think about growth and the
sustainability of growth and development
as we consider reliance on different
energy sources. And then the third, the
Biden administration had taken the very
important step of using tools that we
have for almost a century used to
measure output. So the national income
and product accounts, GDP,
it had used those tools to then measure
and estimate the value of things like
ecosystem services and pollution damages
and natural resources. And what this
paper shows is that prior to the process
of urbanization and firewood sort of
entering markets, as we discussed a
moment ago,
energy was coming from the natural world
and it was not being properly accounted
for in our market economy nor in our
expost efforts as economists to try to
measure the market economy. And so it's
this idea that natural capital, as
economists call things like trees and
fish and and ecosystems, natural capital
is an important contributor to economic
growth and development, often depending
on where countries are in their growth
stage. But in this case, we're talking
about a very large contribution to what
was at the time early 1800s to middle
1800s a rapidly growing economy. So
three things the transition resource
scarcity and how we value natural
capital. I guess there's also the aspect
of the informal economy as well, right?
And this is a debate that still comes up
today, which is how do you value the
work that people are doing just without
being paid, right? So, if you're a
caregiver for a family member or
something like that, that's something
that clearly is producing an economic
outcome, but is not necessarily covered
in the official GDP statistics and
things like that. what lessons can we
learn I guess when it comes to the
informal economy and how we actually
measure that. So, a couple things. 50
plus years ago, one of my adviserss when
I was getting my PhD, a guy named Bill
Nordhouse, who uh won the Nobel Prize in
shared the Nobel Prize for economics in
2018, wrote a paper with James Tobin,
also a Nobel Prize winner on this exact
topic, right? So how do we we improve
measures like GDP to take into account
natural capital which I just mentioned
but also home production and the value
of leisure time and so home production
is central to the valuation conundrum
that is associated with firewood
produced on the home uh in the home
often used in the home at times marketed
through the formal economy and then
increasingly done so. So it raises those
issues in a very central way. I will say
that some of the online discussions of
this paper that I've been made aware of
raise a very important point which is
you know if you're going to compare the
value of firewood production and
consumption to existing measures of GDP
which is largely the within market
version of economic output. Then you
should also measure all the valuable
things that happen in the home,
cleaning, cooking, mending clothes, uh
constructing homes and barns and all the
things that happened back in this
historical period. And that's absolutely
true. The the right measure would
include all those things. I would just
consider that the effort to measure
firewood is an effort to push the
boulder up the hill, right? to get us
from measuring GDP in the strictly
market sense towards that measure that
includes these other important
determinants of social welfare.
>> I have just one more question and it
sort of follows very nicely from the
point you just made but do you think
this type of research this type of data
gathering would have been possible say
10 years ago? I know you mentioned that
you use software to word scrape a bunch
of documents, old documents that would
have been uploaded into you know a
library system or a central database or
something like that. Could you have done
this just 10 years ago? So aspects of it
probably, but it would have been much
more laborious because the data sources
probably would have been on microfilm or
something like that. And so the hours
required to gather a certain number of
price quotes would have been
considerably higher.
>> But 20 years, 15 or 20 years,
>> I don't really think so. I mean, there's
a bunch of I don't even know quite how
to properly refer to them. So archives
maybe is the best way to put it that are
fully online. They are made available
through university subscription services
and they're literally images of very old
texts. The probate records for instance
that comprise the very early price
series were all in those sources. I
didn't go to you know uh records in
Salem, Massachusetts. I found it all
online. And that is a reserve of
information or data that would not have
been possible to collect prior to
community's efforts to digitize and make
public that information. So I guess my
answer uh the short version to my answer
is would it have been possible 10 years
ago some small version of it? Yes, at
much higher time expense but 15 or 20
years ago I I don't think so. I find
this so interesting because now I'm
thinking about all the um new data
sources that we're going to find thanks
to digitization and AI and all of that
stuff and the impact on how we
understand the economy. But we're going
to have to leave it there. Nicholas
Muller, thank you so much for coming on
OPATs. Really enjoyed speaking with you
and really enjoyed the paper.
>> Thank you. Yeah, that was great.
>> Thank you so much for having me. It's
been a pleasure.
[Music]
Joe, I love that conversation. I love
doing these sort of single topic
episodes cuz it just opens up all these
avenues that you haven't necessarily
thought that much about before.
>> Totally. Well, there's a lot in there.
You know, one place to start. I mean,
there's there is a lot. uh the idea of
like railroads as this source of like
price convergence. It's very intuitive
obviously, right? But it's still
interesting to see like how often this
pattern gets repeated over and over
again through commodity history.
Obviously these days, you know, the
story is much more with natural gas
pipelines and the attempts to arbitrage
spreads between, you know, there's not
one unified natural gas price the way
there is in oil precisely because of
these transportation networks. Maybe
there will be at some point with enough
pipelines. That's one story that you see
repeated over and over again throughout
commodities.
>> Yeah. I also just think the point about
the energy transition which we've
discussed with Bob Bracket before as you
mentioned this idea that we have a
notion in our minds often that like
suddenly a new commodity comes on the
scene and everyone switches over really
quickly. But actually we have lots and
lots of historical examples of the
process taking a lot longer than you
would think. And I think Bob used the
example of mercury and now we have
another example in the form of firewood.
>> I certainly was not expecting to hear
that part about yet another firewood
price spike of the 1970s. Like I I sort
of Yeah. Like in my mind it's like okay
the story probably ends somewhere around
the late 1800s. And so the fact that a
hundred years later and then you know
another 30 or 40 years later it's
visible again. I also think maybe like
weren't there some stories about using
fireword like in 2022 um after Russia's
invasion of Ukraine? I can't remember
for sure, but I feel like I remember
hearing some stories about parts of
Europe, you know, um burning fire,
burning wood again for heat. So, yeah,
it's uh it's really hard to actually
fully ever displace a commodity except
whale oil.
I have to say my personal preference
when it comes to BTUs
>> now that I've done coal and wood has to
be wood.
>> Truly renewable resource that won't coat
your entire house in like a dusty black
film. So yeah, go wood.
>> Go wood.
>> All right. Shall we leave it there?
>> Let's leave it there.
>> This has been another episode of the Odd
Thoughts podcast. I'm Tracy Aloway. You
can follow me at Tracy Aloway.
>> And I'm Joe Weisenthal. You can follow
me at the stalwart. Follow our producers
Kerman Rodriguez at Kerman Arman Dashel
Bennett at D-bot and Kalebrooks at
Kalebrooks. For more OddLots content, go
to bloomberg.com/odlots.
We have a daily newsletter and all of
our episodes and you can chat about all
of these topics, including energy in our
Discord, discord.gg/odlotss.
>> And if you enjoy OddLots, if you like it
when we talk about historical prices of
firewood, then please leave us a
positive review on your favorite podcast
platform. And remember, if you are a
Bloomberg subscriber, you can listen to
all of our episodes absolutely adree.
All you need to do is find the Bloomberg
channel on Apple Podcast and follow the
instructions there. Thanks for
listening.
[Music]